JOURNAL OF CONSUMER PSYCHOLOGY, 14(1&2), 168-1 80
Copyright O 2004, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Narrative Processing: Building Consumer
Connections to Brands
Jennifer Edson Escalas
Eller School of Business and Public Administration
University of Arizona
This article proposes that narrative processing creates or enhances self-brand connections
(SBC) because people generally interpret the meaning of their experiences by fitting them into
a story. Similarly, in response to an ad that tells a story, narrative processing may create a link
between a brand and the self when consumers attempt to map incoming narrative information
onto stories in memory. Our approach rests on the notion that a brand becomes more meaning-
ful the more closely it is linked to the self. We conceptualize this linkage at an aggregate level in
terms of SBCs, that is, the extent to which consumers have incorporated the brand into their
self-concepts. The results of an experiment show that narrative processing in response to a nar-
ratively structured ad is positively related to SBCs, which in turn have a positive relation with
brand attitudes and behavioral intentions.
In this article, we explore how brands become meaningful for safe, so I decided to buy a bigger car. I did a lot of research: I
consumers by examining one thought process that may create searched the web and talked to two of my friends who I think
a link between a brand and a consumer's self-concept: the know a lot about car decisions. They convinced me that the
Volkswagen Passat was the safest car in its class. I'm really
construction of narratives or stories. In general, people create
happy with my choice. It's safe for my kids-I've got eight
stories to organize their experiences, create order, explain un-
airbags now! -and I think owning a Passat shows that I'm
usual events, gain perspective, and make evaluations
smart.
(Bruner, 1986, 1990). Narratives fit the pieces of people's
lives together with causal links: Stories elucidate goals, eval-
uate actions to achieve goals, and interpret outcomes (Pen- Consumer stories about brands often involve user and us-
nington & Hastie, 1986). Thus, people use stories to under- age associations (in the previous example, driving a Volks-
stand the world around them, what goes on in their own lives, wagen Passat is considered "smart"), as well as psychologi-
and who they are as individuals and members of society. cal and symbolic benefits (e.g., the Volkswagen Passat
We argue that the meaning ascribed to products and brands provides a sense of safety), which brand equity researchers
can also be generated by narratives. Many scholars have as- relate to the value of a brand (Aaker, 1991; Keller, 1993).
serted that people naturally think in story-like form (Adaval & Thus, what a brand means to a consumer is based in part on
Wyer, 1998; Bruner, 1986; Polkinghorne, 1991; Shank, 1990). the narratives he or she has constructed that incorporate the
It is therefore reasonable that consumers should also interpret brand. Narrative processing maps incoming stories onto sto-
their exposure to and experience with brands via narrative ries in memory (Shank & Abelson, 1995). Because stories
thought processes. For example, in response to aquestion such focus on goals, actions, and outcomes, and stories in memory
as, "Why did you buy a Passat?" consumer might respond are likely to be self-related, a link may be forged between
with a personal story about the decision-making process: brands in an ad story and the achievement of self-related
goals. A self-brand connection (SBC) may be formed based
It was a really difficult decision. I had a Honda Civic before, on these perceived psychological benefits.
and I loved that car. But I've got two kids and I didn't feel First, this article explores the notions of narrative process-
ing and SBCs. Then, we develop hypotheses and present the
findings from a storyboard advertising experiment, which
Requests for reprints should be sent to Jennifer Edson Escalas, Eller
manipulates narrative structure but controls for ad content, to
School of Business and Public Administration, Marketing Department, P.O.
demonstrate that (a) narrative advertising leads to narrative
Box 210108, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0108. E-mail:
jescalas@bpa.arizona.edu processing, (b) narrative processing enhances SBCs, and (c)

BUILDING CONSUMER CONNECTIONS TO BRANDS 169
SBCs are positively related to brand attitudes and behavioral structure of narratives, people are able to make evaluations
intentions. Thus, the contributions of this article are three: we and form judgments by constructing stories (Gergen &
specify one process of building SBCs: stories involving the Gergen, 1988; Pennington & Hastie, 1992).
brand; we develop the SBC concept; and we investigate the The narrative mode of thought does not necessitate that
effects of narrative advertising. individuals form elaborate, complex novels in their minds.
Rather, when engaged in narrative processing, people think
about incoming information as if they were trying to create a
A FRAMEWORK FOR NARRATIVE story-for example, imposing a beginning, middle, and end,
PROCESSING AND SELF-BRAND attributing causality, and so forth. In day to day living, indi-
CONNECTIONS viduals continually attempt to impose a narrative structure on
occurrences to understand them. The emphasis of this article
The basic premise of this research is that people may form is on the narrative mode of thought as a process, not as a men-
SBCs by processing their experiences with brands, including tal representation or memory structure. Narratives are similar
advertisements, in a narrative mode of thought, that is, by to the general concepts of schemas or scripts in that they are
creating stories or imposing a story-like structure on events. organizing mental structures or frameworks (Polkinghorne,
These stories may result in SBCs if the stories create the be- 1991). However, the term schema, which refers to the general
lief for the consumer that the brand contributes to meeting his knowledge a person possesses about a particular domain
or her self-related, psychological needs. First, we discuss (Alba & Hasher, 1983), is a more general concept: Narratives
narrative processing. Then, we examine SBCs, followed by a have a more narrowly defined form and function. Narratives
discussion of consumer-generated and advertising-generated are also different from scripts, which represent commonly
narratives. experienced events as an abstraction (Abelson, 198 1). Narra-
tives pay attention to specific details and unusual events to
explain and interpret such events. In fact, stories conforming
Narrative Processing
strictly to scripts have been given low story ratings by sub-
Narrative processing is able to create meaning because of the jects (Brewer & Lichtenstein, 1981).
structure of narratives. This structure provides temporal and Our approach focuses on narrative processing. We con-
relational organization and a basis for causal inferencing. sider consumers to be creative story builders who do not re-
First, narrative thought organizes events in terms of a tempo- cord the world, but create it, mixing in cultural and individual
ral dimension: The events occur over time (Bruner, 1986, expectations as they construct their personal narratives.
1990). Time is configured in narratives as episodes, which Shank's (1990) and Shank and Abelson's (I 995) view of nar-
structure time into a beginning, middle, and end. Second, rative processing asserts that individuals relate an incoming
narrative thought structures elements into an organized story to stories they have in memory. Typically, these stories
framework that establishes relations between the story's ele- involve the self and one's personal experiences (Kerby, 1991;
ments and allows for causal inferencing. Stories consist of Polkinghorne, 1991) . This is not always the case; for exam-
goal-directed action-outcome sequences (Stein & Albro, ple, most people can tell the story of 0. J. Simpson's life.
1997). Pennington and Hastie (1986) called this structure an However, that story will often include personal details, such
"episode schema": Initial events create responses in charac- as where the storyteller was located when the trial verdict
ters that can be physical, psychological, or both. As a result was announced.
of these responses, the characters develop goals that lead to Under the Shank and Abelson (1995) view, people match
courses of action, which result in certain outcomes. incoming narrative information to episodes stored in mem-
The consumer story about the Volkswagen Passat has all ory to comprehend the information. The matching process
the elements of a narrative. An initial event (having two chil- focuses on key story elements: goals, actions, and outcomes;
dren) resulted in a psychological state (felt need for increased although if no matches are found for these elements, people
safety) that led to the formation of goals (buying a bigger can also search for other cues as well (e.g., type of protago-
car). Next, the consumer researches which car to buy (action) nist, setting, etc.). Story understanding consists of three pos-
and purchases the car (outcome). Because narrative elements sibilities (Shank & Abelson, 1995). One, the new story
are organized through time, causal inferences can be made: matches an already established story in memory, reinforcing
What happens at Time I (the consumer feels unsafe in a small one's beliefs about that story. Two, aspects of the new story
car with children) causes what happens at Time 2 (he re- are used to update missing aspects of the story it most closely
searches which larger car to buy), which in turn causes what matches. And three, the new story provides further evidence
happens at Time 3 (he buys a Passat). Thus, the meaning of for stories only tentatively understood previously.
an event is the result of its being a part of a plot Narratives help people interpret the world around them to
(Polkinghorne, 1991). In the Passat example, the research create meaning, including meaning for brands. The structure
conducted early in the process gives the VW Passat brand a of narratives provides the framework for causal inferencing
"smart" image. As a result of the meaning arising from the about the meaning of brands and the meaning of consumers'

170 EDSON ESCALAS
experiences with brands. For example, if a brand does not Thus, one consumer may drive a BMW to fit in with his or
perform well, what that means to a consumer depends on the her peers, whereas another may drive a Mercedes to differen-
story he or she creates as an explanation. If the consumer tiate him- or herself from an outgroup. Yet another consumer
matches this episode to a story in memory about a company may drive a Cadillac as a symbol of personal accomplish-
that uses low-quality components and has an assembly line ment, whereas a fourth leases a Jaguar, despite the financial
with poorly trained workers, and therefore produces a bad burden of large monthly payments, in the belief it will help
product, he or she may never buy the brand again. On the him or her achieve future success.
other hand, if the consumer creates a story where a qual- Social cognition research on the self has developed a vari-
ity-focused company cannot control every single person or ety of theoretical constructs to explain the complex nature of
component in its production process, and therefore the bad self-knowledge and self-related behavior. The self is concep-
product he or she received is just due to uncontrollable ran- tualized as consisting of multiple aspects (Linville, 1987), in-
dom chance, then the meaning of the poor performance is cluding social roles and personality traits, the most important
completely different. of which are said to be schematic self-aspects (Markus,
Recently, consumer psychology has also taken an interest 1977). Self-complexity is the number and interrelatedness of
in the role of narratives in information processing (Adaval & those aspects (Linville, 1987), whereas possible selves are
Wyer, 1998). In this line of research, narratives have been the future dimensions of those aspects (Markus & Nurius,
shown to improve the evaluation of vacations, compared to 1986). The most salient aspect of self at any moment is said
simple lists of features. The favorable impact of narratives to be the working self-concept (Markus & Kunda, 1986).
has a more noticeable effect when negative features of the va- SBCs need only occur between the brand and one aspect of
cations were included, when pictures accompanied the text, self, with more schematic aspects of self resulting in stronger
and when participants were encouraged to imagine them- connections. For example, Gymboree may be connected to
selves having the vacation experiences. Narrative processing one's mother aspect of self, whereas Burberry may be con-
also increased affective reactions, but these responses did not nected to one's professional aspect of self. If the professional
account for the improved vacation evaluations. The authors aspect of self is more schematic than the mother aspect of
assert that the advantage of narratives comes from their struc- self, the connection to Burberry is likely to be the stronger
tural similarity to information naturally acquired in life expe- one.
riences and from their tendency to induce holistic, not piece- We propose that the connection between a brand and an
meal, information processing strategies, but their research individual's aspect of self can be made in a variety of ways,
does not address the idea that narratives are used to interpret as consumers appropriate brand associations to meet
meaning. This article fills this gap by examining the use of self-motivated goals. Brands can be used to construct and
narratives to create SBCs. cultivate one's self-concept. They can be used to express
one's self-concept, publicly or privately. Brands can be used
as tools for social integration or to connect one to the past.
Self-Brand Connections
Brands act as symbols of personal accomplishment, provide
It is intuitively appealing and generally accepted by our soci- self-esteem, allow one to differentiate oneself and express in-
ety that people use products and brands to create and repre- dividuality, and help one through life transitions. In the pro-
sent desired self-images and to present these images to others cess of using brands to construct one's self-identity, the set of
or even to themselves. One reason why consumers value psy- brand associations may become linked to the consumer's
chological and symbolic brand benefits is because these ben- mental representation of self (Krugman, 1965). We concep-
efits can help consumers construct their self-identity or pres- tualize and operationalize this linkage at the aggregate level
ent themselves to others. Consumer research on the of SBCs, the extent to which individuals have incorporated
significance of important possessions finds that possessions brands into their self-concept (Escalas & Bettman, in press).
can be used to satisfy psychological needs, such as actively We believe that SBCs capture an important part of consum-
creating one's self-concept, reinforcing and expressing ers' construction of self. Therefore, the primary dependent
self-identity, allowing one to differentiate oneself and assert variable in our studies is a measure of the degree to which
one's individuality, and connecting one's self to significant consumers include the brand in their mental representation of
others (e.g., Ball & Tasaki, 1992; Belk, 1988; Kleine, Kleine, self, that is, form an SBC.
& Allen, 1995; Wallendorf & Arnould, 1988). Other re-
searchers have extended some of these possession findings to
Consumer Narratives
brands (Escalas & Bettman, 2003; Fournier, 1998). For ex-
ample, recent research indicates that consumers construct As stated previously, narrative processing provides the mech-
their self-identity and present themselves to others through anism to link brands to the self as incoming information is
their brand choices based on the congruency between matched to stories in memory (Shank & Abelson, 1995).
brand-user associations and self-image associations (or pos- These stories may be impersonal, such as those based solely
sible self-image associations; Escalas & Bettman, 2003). on advertising images, or they may be very significant for the

BUILDING CONSUMER CONNECTIONS TO BRANDS 171
consumer-for example, a life narrative where a brand plays cheering team runs out to celebrate this game-winning catch.
a critical role in a personal transition (cf. Huffman, The ad ends at a Pizza Hut, where the team celebrates its vic-
Ratneshwar, & Mick, 2000; Kleine et al., 1995). In general, tory, with the right fielder at the center of attention. Many ad-
the marketing environment presents people with product and vertising campaigns tell the same core story over and over
brand information. Narrative thought is likely to be used to again varying only the characters and settings (e.g., ads for
integrate external information with personal brand experi- the painkiller Aleve). Other ad campaigns tell continuing sto-
ences because individuals naturally tend to impose a narra- ries. The quintessential continuing story campaign was that
tive structure on events to interpret their meaning. Narrative of Taster's Choice, where each successive ad built on the
thought is also likely to relate such brand experiences to peo- story line presented in the last ad.
ple's self-concepts because people tend to create their There are many ways that an ad can prime narrative
self-identity via self-stories (Polkinghome, 1991). thought. First, ads that are in the form of a story may prime
When incoming information is processed as a story, con- narrative processing by encouraging viewers to think in
sumers will try to map that information on to their existing narrative form by focusing on the story elements and being
story memories, the majority of which involve the self, be- drawn into the story rather than analyzing brand attributes,
cause one's self is present at every moment of one's life. In critiquing the ad, or even tuning out the ad. Some consum-
some cases, consumers may use stories to relate the brand's ers will try to match the incoming story to existing stories
image to their personal experiences and their sense of self, in memory. In some cases, consumers may relate the ad's
creating an SBC. In these stories, the brand may help the story to a personal story and begin to think in a narrative
consumer achieve a self-related goal or it may meet a psy- way about their own lives. In this case, the externally pre-
chological need for the consumer. In some cases, brands sented story provides what can be considered as a narrative
may be incorporated into consumers' life narratives, which shell or script, an initial narrative direction or starting point
are used to describe their path of identity development, for self-generated thought. Another way that advertising
with brands as props or artifacts in that process (Grayson & can elicit narrative thought is by directly encouraging
Shulman, 2000; Kleine et al., 1995). In the Volkswagen self-generated narratives, for example by evoking autobio-
Passat story example, the story builds a link for the con- graphical memories or mental simulation of product use,
sumer between the need to be smart and the process of buy- both of which are often in the form of stories (Baumeister
ing the car. In the end, he concludes that Passat "shows" & Newman, 1994; Fiske, 1993). Ads may prime mental
that he is "smart," meeting his psychological need on that stimulation and autobiographical memory retrieval indi-
dimension. rectly, with images, music, and so forth, or more directly,
with specific instructions or cues for the consumer to fol-
low (e.g., Sujan, Bettman, & Baumgartner, 1993). Thus,
Advertising Narratives
there are degrees to which a consumer becomes an active
Marketers may be able to influence the degree to which con- participant in narrative processing in response to an ad,
sumers form SBCs by their brand's features, positioning, im- ranging from processing narrative ad elements to narrative
age, and advertising, and by influencing consumer narra- elaboration on personal experiences.
tives. By managing consumer narratives about the brand
through advertising, marketers can establish special meaning
for their brand. Advertisers appear to be implicitly aware of HYPOTHESES
the power of narratives because many ads tell stories
(Escalas, 1998). Ads that tell stories are able to involve and We propose that consumers actively construct their self-iden-
entertain consumers and, more important, are able to com- tities using brand associations that arise through narrative
municate and model how products may be used to create processing, and this process results in SBCs. Consumer re-
meaning. Narrative advertising includes a variety of advertis- searchers have studied self-generated, naturally occumng
ing types studied by consumer researchers: drama ads consumer narratives and found that stories about brands that
(Deighton, Romer, & McQueen, 1989; Stern, 1994), some help achieve self-identity goals result in SBCs (Escalas &
forms of transformational advertisements (Puto & Wells, Bettman, 2000). In this article, we focus on narrative adver-
1984), slice of life ads (Mick, 1987), and so forth. tisements, which should prime narrative thought, as a means
Advertisements tell stories to varying degrees (Mick, of building SBCs. A story ad incorporates a brand into narra-
1987). Some ads are complete, well-developed stories in and tive elements (e.g., goals, actions, outcomes). As consumers
of themselves. For example, a recent ad for Pizza Hut is told try to map incoming narrative ad information onto their sto-
in the form of a narrative. At a Little League baseball game, ries in memory, they compare the ad story to their own per-
the main character, a young redheaded boy, plays right field. sonal experiences, searching for stories with similar goals,
The action begins when a ball is hit in the boy's direction. He actions, and outcomes. This matching process provides the
raises his glove and miraculously catches the ball, accom- basis for the formation or strengthening of an SBC. If a con-
plishing his goal. His face first registers shock, then joy. The sumer matches an ad story where the brand being advertised

helps the actor achieve a certain goal (e.g., self-enhancement, between narrative structure and A Aw~ill be left as an empiri-
belonging to a reference group, etc.) onto his or her own sto- cal question.
ries about actions taken to achieve those same goals, a link
may be formed between the brand and the consumer's per-
ceived ability to achieve a desired outcome. Narrative struc- STORYBOARD AD EXPERIMENT
ture provides the temporal and componential relations neces-
sary for these types of inferences. Our core hypothesis, H1, is In this study, storyboard advertisements were used to manip-
therefore that narrative processing will create or enhance ulate narrative processing. Storyboards are commonly used
SBCs. (We assume that the narratives are positively valenced by advertising agencies to sketch out ad concept ideas. As a
in terms of the brand.) medium, storyboard ads present a series of scenes, which en-
ables them to tell a well-developed story. On the other hand,
H 1: Narrative processing will lead to the creation or these are not actual television ads with live action and a
enhancement of SBCs. soundtrack, so their ability to tell a story will be a conserva-
tive test of our hypotheses. However, the storyboard ad stim-
Our experiment directly tests whether narrative ad structure uli enable us to manipulate narrative structure while simulta-
evokes narrative thought processes and separately measures neously controlling narrative content.
the effect of narrative ad structure on SBCs. Our empirical Four ads were used in the experiment, crossing story and
test of this hypothesis is conservative because we examine nonstory versions over two brands (all between subject). We
narrative processing in the context of an externally presented first ran a pretest to collect and analyze participants' thought
narrative advertisement, as opposed to an entirely self-gener- protocols to be certain narrative ad structure leads to narra-
ated consumer narrative. tive processing. Then, the experiment was run (with distinct
SBCs should, in turn, have a favorable effect on brand participants) to collect the dependent measures (SBC, AB,
attitudes (AB) and behavioral intentions (BI). Brands that BI, and AAd)w ithout the elicitation of thought protocols, to
are connected to a consumer's sense of self should be re- avoid the assertion that the act of writing the thought proto-
garded more favorably than less meaningful brands. Con- cols affected our dependent measures. Involvement in the
sumers should be predisposed to respond favorably toward product category was included to rule out the possibility that
a brand that helps them achieve their self-identity goals.' SBCs reflect involvement rather than a connection between
Furthermore, consumers with SBCs should also behave the consumer's self-concept and the brand. Real-world
more consistently with regard to the brand, thus there brands were used, requiring the measurement of prior SBCs
should be a positive relation between SBCs and consumers' (Prior SBC) and prior brand attitudes (Prior Ae) to be used as
likelihood of trial, purchase, higher willingness to pay, or covariates.
all of these.
Ad Stimulus Creation
H2: SBCs will be positively related to attitudes toward the
brand and behavioral intentions. Scenes from two real-world television ads were digitally cap-
tured and modified for this study. Specifically, the ads were
One also might argue that ads that tell stories should be for American Express, with 9 scenes, and Kodak film, with
evaluated as better advertisements and therefore generate 10 scenes. These scenes were arranged to create one
higher attitudes toward the ad (AA~)H. owever, there are story-like structure and one nonstoried, vignette structure for
many different types of advertisements that do not tell each brand.2 Stem (1994) differentiated classical (considered
well-developed stories, but still may be considered excellent here to be narrative) dramas from vignette dramas based on
advertisements and engender high ad attitudes. In a recent differences in attributes, such as plot, character, and
content analysis, Escalas (1998) found that just over 20% of narrativity. Briefly, the attributes of classical dramas are plot,
advertisements contain well-developed stories. Although linear chronological progression, few but central characters,
this frequency makes the study of narrative advertising ef- and less explicit narration; whereas the attributes of vignettes
fects relevant and interesting, it leaves a great deal of room are episodic repetitions of actions, lack of chronological or-
for other types of advertisements that may be very well-re- dering, many but unrelated characters, and more explicit nar-
ceived by consumers-for example, vignette advertisements ration (in the case of the stimulus storyboard ads, the same
(Stem, 1994), lecture ads (Wells, 1988), informational ads wording was used under each scene, so the differences in nar-
(Puto & Wells, 1984), and so forth. Therefore, the relation ration are not relevant). The scenes used in the story condi-
tion and in the vignette condition were identical, with only
'Please note that although the existence of a SBC implies a positive 2While the original American Express ad was clearly a story, the ad for
brand attitude, the inverse is not true. Consumers may have favorable atti- Kodak was not. Therefore, additional scenes were added to create the storied
tudes toward many brands where no SBCs exist. version of the Kodak ad.

BUILDING CONSUMER CONNECTIONS TO BRANDS 173
the order of presentation changed. In the vignette condition, In the second part of the study, participants were given a brief
some of the individuals were slightly modified (hair color, description of the use of storyboard advertising in advertising
skin color) so that it would not look as if it were the same peo- agencies (with a storyboard poster from a local ad agency)
ple again and again. A brief description of each scene and and then viewed one of the four storyboard advertisements.
listing of the orders presented in the story versus vignette The storyboard ad scenes had been loaded into Microsoft
conditions can be found in Table 1. PowerPoint@a nd were projected onto a large theater-style
screen in an electronically equipped classroom for 15 sec
each, transitioning automatically through the 9 or 10 scenes.
Thought Protocol Pretest
Each storyboard ad began and ended with a photo of the
Subjects. Two hundred fifteen introductory marketing product and its tagline to help participants comprehend the
students from a southwestern university participated in ex- ad. Each experimental session was exposed to one storyboard
change for credit toward fulfillment of a course requirement. ad one time.
Immediately following the storyboard ad presentation,
Procedure. In the first part of the study, participants participants in the thought protocol pretest were asked,
filled out a questionnaire that included a measure of prior AB "Please write down what you were thinking while you
for the brand included in the storyboard ad they would later watched the storyboard version of this advertisement. After
"
see, plus 12 filler brands; a measure of prior SBC for the tar- writing down their thoughts, they turned to a new page where
get brand, plus five filler brands; and demographic variables. they were asked some additional questions not used for this
project, and then they were dismissed. The thought protocol
pretest took about 20 min. (To reiterate, the procedure up to
TABLE 1
and including exposure to the storyboard ad was identical in
Scenes Used in StoryBoard Advertisements
the pretest and in the experiment described next.)
in Experiment
Vignette Measuring narrative processing. To test the asser-
Story Order Order
tion that narrative ad structure leads to narrative processing,
Kodak Ad the thoughts participants' reported as having while watching
1. Photo: film box and tagline (True Colors) 1 the storyboard ad were coded by two coders blind to the ex-
Announcer Kodak Film
perimental conditions. The thoughts were coded for the de-
2. Photo: bride, "The bride on wedding day." 4
gree to which these thoughts told a well-developed story us-
3. Photo: father, "The father-of-the-bride remembers." 5
4. Photo: baby with father, "Babies start out so cute and 9 ing the six-item scale shown in Table 2. The set of each
small." subject's thoughts was coded as a single story unit, rather
5. Photo: toddler girl by wreath, "Meny Christmas." 7 than being broken down into smaller component phrases
6. Photo: preschool girl in fairy costume, "Trick or treat." 2
(Riessman, 1993). The scale items are based primarily on
7. Photo: young girl smiling, "Father teaches his daughter to 8
Pennington and Hastie's (1986, 1992) episode schema,
dance."
8. Photo: young girl with father, "Ballet recital." 3 which highlight the causal and temporal relation between
9. Photo: bride and father dancing, "A special dance." 6 story elements found in narrative thought: An initial event re-
10. Photo: film box and tagline, "Kodak Film: For the times 10 sults in a response in a character, actions are undertaken to
of your life."
achieve goals, and these actions result in an outcome (Items 1
American Express Ad
1. Photo: card and tagline (Membership has its 1
privileges/Don't leave home without it) Announcer: The TABLE 2
American Express Card. Narrative Structure Coding Scale Items
2. Photo: hand near computer monitor, "Doctor pointing to 6
sonogram: 'Here's the head'." 1. To what extent do these thoughtsldoes this ad consist of actors engaged
3. Photo: wonied couple, "Expecting parents: 'Are we 7 in actions to achieve goals?
prepared for a baby?"' 2. To what extent do these thoughtsldoes this ad let you know what the
4. Photo: couple by strollers, "Father-to-be: 'Is this the best 5 actors are thinking and feeling?
stroller?'" 3. To what extent do these thoughtsldoes this ad provide you with insight
5. Photo: woman handing man small shoes, "Expecting 3 about the personal evolution or change in the life of a character?
mother: 'Do you like these baby shoes?"' 4. To what extent do these thoughtsldoes this ad explain why things
6. Photo: formula bottles, "Announcer: 'So many things are 2 happen, that is, what caused things to happen?
needed for a baby.. .'" 5. To what extent do these thoughtsldoes this ad have a well-delineated
7. Photo: woman by mobile, "Mother-to-be: 'Isn't this 4 beginning (initial event), middle (crisis or turning point), and ending
cute?"' (conclusion)?
8. Photo: couple with salesperson at counter, "Father-to-be: 8 6. To what extent do these thoughtsfdoes this ad focus on specific,
'We'll take everything." particular events rather than on generalizations or abstractions?
9. Photo: card and tagline, Announcer: "American Express 9
Note. These items are measured on 5-point scales, anchored by not at all
helps you be prepared."
(1) and very much so (5).

174 EDSON ESCALAS
and 4). Another item attempts to capture the chronology of credit toward fulfillment of a course requirement. Partici-
narrative. These items address whether the thoughts have a pants were randomly assigned to one of six sessions ranging
temporal dimension with a beginning, middle, and end (Item in size from 23 to 35 students. In one session, the classroom
5). In her discussion of classical drama ads, Stern (1994) equipment failed during the study. Thirty participants were
highlighted three necessary elements for classical drama or eliminated for this reason, leaving a total of 153 participants.
narrative advertisements: chronology, causality, and charac-
ter development. These elements correspond to Items 1,3,4, Procedure. The procedure for this experiment was ex-
and 5. actly the same as the thought protocol pretest, until after the
Furthermore, Bruner (1986,1990) proposed two narrative storyboard ad was shown. As before, participants were led to
dimensions: a landscape of action and a landscape of con- believe that they were participating in two separate "experi-
sciousness. The former is the causal sequence of events, ments." In the "first experiment" participants filled out a se-
whereas the latter is the degree to which the viewer is made ries of questionnaire items to be used as covariates. In the
aware of what the protagonist is thinking and feeling. Bruner "second experiment" participants were given the same de-
asserted that the landscape of consciousness improves story scription of the use of storyboard advertising in advertising
quality over a narrative containing only a landscape of action. agencies and then viewed one of the four storyboard adver-
To examine the landscape of consciousness, the scale as- tisements, projected onto a large theater-style screen in an
sesses the degree to which viewers or readers are made aware electronically equipped classroom (15 sec per scene).
of the psychological state of the protagonist, that is, what he At this point, the experiment differs from the pretest.
or she is thinking and feeling (Item 2). Finally, one item ad- Here, ad exposure was followed by a questionnaire that asked
dresses the characteristic focus of narrative thought on par- participants to circle their ad and brand attitudes and indicate
ticular events rather than generalities or abstractions (Item 6). their likelihood of purchase. The questionnaire then asked a
The six items were averaged for each coder to form one series of unrelated questions. Once these questions were
narrative score for each coder for each participant's thought completed, participants participated in another advertising
protocol. Both coders coded 60% of the thought protocols, filler task where they viewed a different storyboard ad for an
overlapping on 10% of the participants (Cronbach's a for the unrelated product (counterbalanced across all subjects) and
six items for Coder 1 = .74, a coder 2 = .75). For this overlap, completed more questionnaire items. This was followed by a
the two coders' average narrative scores were highly corre- seven-item SBC scale for the brand advertised in the original
lated (r = .54, p < .001). Therefore, the two coders' narrative storyboard ad and several manipulation check items. The en-
scores were averaged to form one narrative score per ad for tire procedure for the experiment took about 1.5 hr.
the overlapping 10% (a = .75) and their individual average
scores were used for the remaining participants. Dependent variables. After exposure to the story-
board advertisement, AAd, AB, and behavioral intentions
Pretest results. One of the primary assertions in this were measured. Ad and brand attitudes were measured using
article is that the narrative structure of an advertisement will three 7-point scale items, anchored by very unfavorable/very
affect the extent to which ad viewers will engage in narrative favorable, very badvery good, and very negative/very posi-
processing. The pretest tests this claim directly. The coded tive (a = .90, a = .98, respectively). Behavioral intentions
narrative structure scores are significantly different by ad were measured using one 7-point scale item: "How likely
type, vignette = 1.18, story = 1.37, F(1, 210) = 12.66, p < would you be to purchase and/or use this brand? " After the
.001, in a model of brand, ad type, and their interaction, indi- filler task, participants completed a 7-item SBC scale for the
cating that storyboard ads that tell a story lead to greater nar- brand seen in the storyboard ad (a = .94), well separated
rative processing than storyboard ads that do not tell a story. from the other dependent variables to avoid potential con-
(Brand is also significant in this model; however, the interac- founds (see Table 3 for a list of the seven items; see the Ap-
tion of brand by ad type was not.) Although these narrative pendix for a discussion of the development of this scale).
processing numbers may appear low, the narrative structure
scale used to code the thought protocols was designed to Covariates. Prior to ad exposure, participants com-
evaluate a wide range of narrative quality, including televi- pleted three of the seven SBC scale items (1, 2, and 3, a =
sion advertisements (Escalas, 1998). Furthermore, the rela- .96) to measure prior SBC and a two-item prior AB scale (r
tively low narrative processing results work against HI, mak- = 39) to be used as covariates in the analyses of results. (In
ing the test more conservative. the interest of time, because these items were repeated for a
number of filler brands to disguise the purpose of the items,
only three of the seven SBC scale items were used to mea-
Experiment: Method
sure prior SBC.) These three items were chosen based on
Participants. One hundred eighty-three introductory their having the highest item-to-total correlation with the
marketing students sampled from the same population as the 7-item SBC scale (r > 35; Escalas & Bettman, 2003.) Gen-
pretest participated in our experiment, again in exchange for der was also included as a covariate because the content of

TABLE 3
Self-Brand Connection Scale Items
1. Brand X reflects who I am.
| -3          | -2  | -I  | 0        | 1   | 2   | 3   |
| ----------- | --- | --- | -------- | --- | --- | --- |
| Not at all  |     |     | Neutral  |     |     |     |
Extremely well
2. I can identify with Brand X.
| -3          | -2  | - 1  | 0        |     | 2   | 3               |
| ----------- | --- | ---- | -------- | --- | --- | --------------- |
| Not at all  |     |      | Neutral  |     |     | Extremely well  |
3. I feel a personal connection to Brand X.
| -3          | -2  | - 1  | 0        |     | 2   | 3               |
| ----------- | --- | ---- | -------- | --- | --- | --------------- |
| Not at all  |     |      | Neutral  |     |     | Extremely well  |
4. I (can) use Brand X to communicate who 1 am to other people.
| -3          | -2  | -1  | 0        |     | 2   | 3               |
| ----------- | --- | --- | -------- | --- | --- | --------------- |
| Not at all  |     |     | Neutral  |     |     | Extremely well  |
5. I think Brand X (could) help(s) me become the type of person I want to be.
| -3          | -2  | - 1  | 0        |     | 2   | 3               |
| ----------- | --- | ---- | -------- | --- | --- | --------------- |
| Not at all  |     |      | Neutral  |     |     | Extremely well  |
6. I consider Brand X to be "me" (it reflects who I consider myself to be or the way that 1 want to present myself to others).
- 1
| -3          | -2  |     | 0        | 1   | 2   | 3               |
| ----------- | --- | --- | -------- | --- | --- | --------------- |
| Not at all  |     |     | Neutral  |     |     | Extremely well  |
7. Brand X suits me well.
| -3          | -2  | -1  | 0        |     | 2   | 3               |
| ----------- | --- | --- | -------- | --- | --- | --------------- |
| Not at all  |     |     | Neutral  |     |     | Extremely well  |
the two ads might not be  gender neutral (see Table  I).  dummy variable, with the average of the seven-item SBC
Finally, product category involvement, measured by four  scale as the independent variable.
items (level of involvement, self-reported expertise, high
versus low interest, and frequency of use, a = .68), was in-
Scale verification.  Analysis of the seven SBC items
cluded in the models to assure that SBCs are distinct from
shows that the SBC scale is unidimensional, reliable, and em-
involvement.
pirically distinct from AB. First, exploratory factor analysis
of the seven SBC items results in a single-dimension solution
Manipulation checks.  Three items measured the de-  (with the first eigenvalue > 5.10, all others < 1.0, and a dis-
gree to which participants perceived the storyboard ad told a  tinct elbow in the scree plot) that explains 73% of the vari-
story ("the ad told a story"; "the ad had a beginning, middle,  ance in the seven SBC scale items. The seven SBC items load
and end"; "the ad showed the personal evolution of one or  on this single factor (all r > .73). Next, an unconstrained
more characters"; a = .78). Three additional items measured  LISREL model, with seven SBC items, three AB items, and
the degree to which participants felt the ads were more like a  everything free to vary except the two-factor structure, re-
|     |     |     |     |     | x2  (34) = 170.44,p  <  |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ----------------------- | --- |
vignette, based on Stern's (1994) classification criteria ("the  sults in a significant chi-square statistic,
ad showed many unrelated scenes"; "the ad had many differ-  .001, which is not unusual given this test statistic's sensitivity
ent characters"; "the ad had no chronological order"; a =  to sample size. However, the other fit indexes suggest that the
.62). Finally, three 7-point scales assessed the perceived  two-factor model fits the data reasonably well (compara-
quality of the ad ("the storyboard ad was professional,"; "the  tive-fit index [CFI] = .92, incremental-fit index [IFI] = .92,
storyboard ad was high quality"; and "the storyboard ad was  goodness-of-fit index [GFI] = 30, and standardized root
realistic"; a = 36).  mean square residual [RMR] = 0.07). The standardized fac-
tor loadings exceed 0.80 for SBC and 0.96 for AB (all t >
10.0). To provide evidence of discriminant validity between
Experiment: Results  the two constructs, we ran a LISREL model constraining the
10 scale items to load on a single factor. This model is signifi-
Hypothesis 1 and the effects on AAda re analyzed with an
cantly worse than the unconstrained model (x2 difference =
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) model that includes the
707.37, p < .001).
four covariates (gender, category involvement, prior As, and
prior SBC), a brand variable (Kodak vs. American Express),
an ad type variable (story vs. vignette), and their interaction  Manipulation checks.  The main  study contains two
(brand by ad type). Hypothesis 2 is tested with an ANCOVA  manipulation checks designed to assess whether participants
model that also includes the four covariates and the brand  perceived the storyboard ads to be stories or vignettes, both

176 EDSON ESCALAS
of which are significant. The story manipulation check indi- real-world brands. Our results provide preliminary support
cates that participants perceived the story order to be telling a for the framework developed in this article. First, we success-
story to a greater extent than the vignette order, vignette = fully manipulate the degree to which participants engage in
4.70, story = 5.27, F(1, 151) = 5.52,~< .05. Participants also narrative processing with our storyboard stimulus (pretest re-
perceived that the vignette order was more like a vignette sults). When we show participants a well-developed story or-
than the story order, vignette = 3.93, story = 3.00, F( 1, 15 1) = der of the ad scenes, their self-reported thoughts while view-
18.41, p < .001. Finally, participants do not find that either ing the ad exhibit more narrative structure than the thoughts
type of ad is significantly different in terms of ad quality, vi- reported by participants in the vignette storyboard condition.
gnette = 5.24, story = 5.25, F(l, 145) < 1.0. In terms of our first hypothesis, we find that viewing a
storyboard ad organized into a narrative results in signifi-
Hypothesis 1. This hypothesis asserts that increased cantly higher SBC, compared to viewing the same scenes in a
narrative processing, manipulated by whether the ad scenes vignette order. We find this result despite the fact that the
were ordered to create a story ad versus a vignette ad, will en- content of the storyboard ads is essentially identical. Com-
hance SBCs. H1 is supported by the data, vignette = 2.78, bining these results with the pretest results, we propose that
story = 2.95, F(1, 145) = 2.68, p < .05, one-tailed. (Neither narrative processing improves SBC. For our second hypothe-
the brand variable nor the interaction of brand by ad type is sis, we find that SBCs are associated with better attitudes to-
significant. Of the four covariates, prior AB and prior SBC ward the brand and higher likelihood of purchase. Finally,
are significant, whereas the category involvement variable is narrative structure has no direct effect on ad attitudes. This
marginally significant. Furthermore, when allowed to inter- finding is logical in this study, because ad content is tightly
act with themselves, brand, and ad type, none of the covariate controlled and both classical dramas and vignette dramas are
interactions are significant.) common, well-accepted forms of advertising (Stem, 1994).
This finding also runs counter to alternative explanations that
Hypothesis 2. This hypothesis predicts a positive rela- the narrative order created better or more easily compre-
tion between SBCs and AB and BI. A within-subjects hended ads, or that the vignette order was considered
multivariate analysis of covariance (MANCOVA) examining confusing.
the effect of SBCs on the brand attitude and purchase inten-
tion variables is significant, h = .96, F(1, 149) = 3.3 1, p < .05.
(The category involvement and prior AB covariates and the CONCLUSION
brand dummy variable are also significant in this model.)
The univariate results also support this hypothesis. SBCs This article explores narrative processing as one process by
positively and significantly affect AB, P = .23, F(1, 146) = which brands can become connected to consumers' self-con-
8.86, p < .Ol, and likelihood of purchase, P = .43, F(1, 146) = cepts. To make sense of what goes on in the world, people
18.52, p < .001. (In the model of AB, the category involve- naturally construct stories. Narratives are a mental organiz-
ment and prior AB covariates and the brand dummy variable ing structure that provides meaning by combining elements
are significant, whereas prior SBC is not. In the model of PI, temporally toward a goal or conclusion. The meaning of a
prior AB and the brand dummy variable are significant, brand is often the result of its being part of a story. Through
whereas category involvement and prior SBC are not.)3 the narrative meaning-making process, some brands become
more important and valuable than others to consumers, be-
Attitude toward the ad. In this study, we find no rela- coming connected to consumers' sense of self. Our experi-
tion between the narrative structure of the ad and AAd,F (1, ment demonstrates that ads eliciting increased narrative
150) < 1.0, ns. (Only the brand variable is significant in this processing are associated with enhanced SBCs. These mean-
model.) We controlled the content of the two storyboard ads ingful brands are evaluated more favorably and have a higher
to be as identical as possible in this study. Rearranging the or- likelihood of purchase than brands with few or no SBCs.
der of the scenes and altering the appearance of some actors
does not affect how well participants like the ad.
Theoretical Contributions
This article proposes and empirically supports the idea that
Discussion of Results
narratives are one means through which SBCs are formed.
This study examines the effects of the narrative, SBC frame- Previous research into consumer narrative processing
work in the context of storyboard advertisements and (Adaval & Wyer, 1998) demonstrated the positive effects of
this style of thought on brand evaluations, but it did not ex-
plore the creation of meaning (i.e., SBCs). The narrative SBC
3~lthoughw e do not specifically hypothesize that SBC will mediate the
framework identifies one specific mechanism by which nar-
effect of ad type on AB and BI, we do find a significant indirect effect of ad
type + SBC + AB (Z = 2.21, p < .05) and BI (Z = 2.38, p < .05; Kenny, ratives are able to create meaning: through their structure.
Kashy, & Bolger, 1998). When consumers engage in narrative processing, they at-

BUILDING CONSUMER CONNECTIONS TO BRANDS 177
tempt to match the goal-directed action-outcome episodes to ferent from consumers who do not possess such stories. Fu-
existing stories in memory (Shank & Abelson, 1995). The re- ture research could explore the implications of self-related
lational structure and temporal dimension of stories allow brand stories on narrative processing of incoming informa-
consumers to make inferences and draw conclusions about tion, as well as potential memory effects.
the brand and its potential link to their self-concept-related In our theoretical development, we discuss the differ-
goals. This precise identification of the mechanism by which ence between self-generated narratives and advertising-gen-
narratives create andlor enhance SBCs extends other con- erated narratives. Based on this discussion, we would pre-
sumer research that has made general claims that people use dict that self-generated stories should be much more likely
narratives to create a self-identity (e.g., Kleine et al., 1995; to positively influence SBCs than ad-generated narratives.
Thompson, Locander, & Pollio, 1990). However, our experiment does not examine the degree to
In addition, we have extended narrative research to the which participants' thoughts were based on ad elements or
realm of advertising. The narrative framework allows con- on the participants themselves. For example, both of the
sumer researchers to understand many different types of ad- following excerpts were given a narrative structure score of
vertising that have been studied by others, such as drama ads 2.17 by the independent coders: "A young couple preparing
(Deighton et al., 1989; Stern, 1994), transformational ads for their first-born and how they're able to afford the things
(Puto & Wells, 1984), slice of life ads (Mick, 1987), ads that they want for their baby with American Express" versus "I
evoke autobiographical memories (Sujan et al., 1993), ads was thinking about when I had my two babies. About how
that induce mental stimulation (Escalas & Krishnamurthy, it is a milestone in every parent's life." Unfortunately, we
1995), and so on, from an integrated framework that captures do not have a data set that includes both the thought proto-
the essence of narrative structure harbored in these other cols and the SBC scores. Future research can explore the
forms. All of these ad types elicit narrative thought. Although degree to which consumer narratives in response to adver-
there may be subtle differences in the degree to which narra- tising are guided by the ads themselves or serve as starting
tive thought is evoked and its subsequent effects, an overall points for self-generated stories and the differential effects
framework based on the way that narrative processing works of such thoughts on SBCs.
and its general effects may aid in understanding the way Finally, there may be a number of additional factors that
these ad types work. moderate the effects of narrative advertisements on creating
meaning and building SBCs. For example, future research
can examine individual differences in the propensity of con-
Limitations and Directions for Future Research
sumers to form SBCs. Some consumers may view brands
The experiment described in this article represents an initial from merely a utilitarian perspective, whereas others may be
demonstration of the effects of narrative processing on SBCs. more inclined to consider their symbolic properties. Other
Obviously, not all stories will create or enhance SBCs. Future potential moderators emerge from the social cognition litera-
research can uncover and explore different aspects of narra- ture, including which aspect of self is active in a consumer's
tive advertisements that help or hinder an ad's ability to (a) working self-concept and whether these are schematic versus
evoke narrative processing in consumers and (b) encourage nonschematic aspects of self. Activation of more important,
SBC building by consumers. Some potential aspects of nar- schematic aspects of self should enhance SBCs to a greater
rative advertisements that could be studied include whether extent than activation of nonschematic aspects. Finally, con-
the brand is a minor prop or a central aspect of the story, sumer research also reveals potential moderators, such as the
whether the story has unexpected elements, different dra- degree to which consumers use persuasion knowledge
matic forms (or plots; e.g., comedy vs. tragedy; see Stem, (Friestad & Wright, 1994) and their level of ad involvement
1995), different degrees of character development, mo- (Celsi & Olson, 1988). The former may serve to reduce a nar-
ment-by-moment plot twists, and different types of emotions rative ad's ability to generate narrative processing and subse-
evoked by different ad stories. quent SBC formation, whereas the latter may serve to en-
Our experiment is also limited by the fact that, as a hance this process.
cross-sectional design, it does not provide as strong evidence
of the direction of causality between narrative processing and
SBCs as we might have liked. The argument can be made that
consumers with strong SBCs process incoming advertising ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
information in a more narrative manner because the connec-
tions are already in memory. We reduce the possibility of this This research was partially funded by the University of Ari-
alternative explanation by including prior SBC as a covariate zona Foundation and the Office of the Vice President for
in our models and by analyzing the thought protocols in a Research at the University of Arizona. I thank my disserta-
separate pretest. However, it is reasonable to assume that if a tion committee for their contribution to this research: James
consumer has a series of self-related brand stories in mem- R. Bettman (chair), Julie A. Edell, Marian Chapman
ory, their narrative processing of incoming stories will be dif- Moore, Patricia W. Linville, and Lynn Hasher. I also thank

178 EDSON ESCALAS
the editor and three reviewers for their help with this re- Gergen, K. J., & Gergen, M. M. (1988). Narrative and the self as relation-
search. ship. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 21, 17-56.
Grayson, K., & Shulman, D. (2000). Indexicality and the verification func-
tion of irreplaceable possessions: A semiotic analysis. Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 27, 17-30.
Huffman, C., Ratneshwar, S., & Mick, D. G. (2000). Consumer goal struc-
REFERENCES
ture and goal determination processes: An integrative framework. In C.
Huffman, S. Ratneshwar, & D. G. Mick (Eds.), The why of consumption:
Aaker, D. A. (1991). Managing brand equity: Capitalizing on the value of a Contemporary perspectives on consumer motives, goals and desires (pp.
brand name. New York: Free Press. 9-35). New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Abelson, R. P. (1981). The psychological status of the script concept. Ameri- Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing cus-
can Psychologist, 36, 7 15-729. tomer-based brand equity. Journal of Markering, 57, 1-22.
Abelson, R. P., & Prentice, D. A. (1989). Beliefs as possessions: A func- Kenny, D. A,, Kashy, D. A,, & Bolger, N. (1998). Data analysis in social psy-
tional perspective. In A. R. Pratkanis, S. J. Breckler, & A. G. Greenwald chology. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of
(Eds.), Attitude structure and function (pp. 361-38 1). Hillsdale, NJ: Law- social psychology (pp. 233-265). New York: McGraw-Hill.
rence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. Kerby, A. P. (1991). Narrative and the selJ:B loomington: Indiana University
Adaval, R., & Wyer, R. S., Jr. (1998). The role of narratives in consumer in- Press.
formation processing. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 7, 207-245. Kleine, S. S., Kleine, R. E., 111, & Allen, C. T. (1995). The way that is a pos-
Alba, J. W., & Hasher, L. (1983). Is memory schematic? Psychological Bul- session "Me" or "Not Me"? Characterizing types and the antecedents of
letin, 93, 203-23 l. material possession attachment. Journal of Consumer Research, 22,
Ball, A. D., & Tasaki, L. H. (1992). The role and measurement of attachment 327-343.
in consumer behavior. Jo~crnalo f Consumer Psychology, 2, 155-1 72. Krishnamurthy, P., & Sujan, M. (1999). Retrospection versus anticipation:
Baumeister, R. F., & Newman, L. S. (1994). The way that stories make sense The role of the ad under retrospective and anticipatory self-referencing.
of personal experiences: Motives that shape autobiographical narratives. Journal of Consumer Research, 26, 55-69.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20, 676490. Krugman, H. E. (1965). The impact of television advertising: Learning with-
Belk, R. W. (1988). Possessions and the extended self. Journal of Consumer out involvement. Public Opinion Quarterly, 30, 349-356.
Research, 15, 139-168. Linville, P. W. (1987). Self-complexity as a cognitive buffer against
Brewer, W. F., & Lichtenstein, E. H. (1981). Event schemas, story schemas, stress-related illness and depression. Journal of Personality and Social
and story grammars. In J. Long & A. Baddeley (Eds.), Attention andper- Psychology, 52,663-676.
formance IX (pp. 363-379). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Markus, H. (1977). Self-schemata and processing information about the
Inc. self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 63-78.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Haward Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist,
University Press. 41, 954-969.
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Markus, H., & Kunda, Z. (1986). Stability and malleability of the self-con-
Press. cept. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 585-866.
Burnkrant, R. E., & Unnava, H. R. (1995). Effects of self-referencing on per- Meyers-Levy, J., & Perrachio, L. A. (1996). Moderators of the impact of
suasion. Journal of Consumer Research, 22, 17-26. self-reference on persuasion. Journal of Consumer Research, 22,
Celsi, R. L., &Olson, J. C. (1988). The role of involvement in attention and 408-423.
comprehension processes. Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 21&224. Mick, D. G. (1987). Toward a semiotic of advertising story grammars. In J.
Davidson, R., & MacKinnon, J. G. (198 1). Several tests for model specifica- Umiker-Sebeok (Ed.), Marketing and semiotics: New directions in the
tion in the presence of alternative hypotheses. Econornetrica, 49, study of signs for sale (pp. 249-278). Berlin, Germany: de Gruyter.
781-793. Owen, S. (1993). The Landor Imagepower ~urve~: A0 g lobal assessment
Deighton, J., Romer, D., & McQueen, J. (1989). Using drama to persuade. of brand strength. In D. A. Aaker & A. L. Biel (Eds.), Brand equity and
Journal of Consumer Research, 16, 335-343. advertising: Advertising's role in building strong brands (pp. 11-30).
Escalas, J. E. (1998). Advertising narratives: What are they and how do they Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, lnc.
work? In B. Stem (Ed.), Representing c0nsumer.s: Voices, views, and vi- Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1986). Evidence evaluation in complex deci-
sions (pp. 267-289). New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. sion making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51,242-258.
Escalas, J. E., & Bettman, J. R. (2000). Using narratives to discern self-iden- Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1992). Explaining the evidence: Tests of the
tity related consumer goals and motivations. In C. Huffman, S. story model for juror decision making. Journal of Personality and Social
Ratneshwar, & D. G. Mick (Eds.), The why of consumption: Contempo- Psychology, 62, 189-206.
rary perspectives on consumer motives, goals and desires (pp. 237-258). Polkinghome, D. E. (1991). Narrative and self-concept. Journal of Narra-
New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. tive and Ltfe History, 1, 135-1 53.
Escalas, J. E., & Bettman, J. R. (2003). You are what they eat: The influence Puto, C. P., & Wells, W. D. (1984). Informational and transformational ad-
of reference groups on consumer connections to brands. Journal of Con- vertising: The differential effects of time. Advances in Consumer Re-
sumer Psychology, 13, 339-348. search, 11, 572-576.
Escalas, J. E., & Krishnamurthy, P. (1995). Self-referencing: An examina- Riessman, C. K. (1993). Narrative analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
tion of antecedents, consequences, and role in message processing. Ad- Shank, R. C. (1990). Tell me a story: Narrative and intelligence. Evanston,
vances in Consumer Re.rearch, 22, 340-342. IL: Northwestern University Press.
Fiske, S. T. (1993). Social cognition and social perception. Annual Review of Shank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1995). Knowledge and memory: The real
Psycho1og)s 44, 155-194. story. In R. S. Wyer, Jr. (Ed.), Knowledge andmemory: The real story (pp.
Fournier, S. (1998). Consumers and their brands: Developing relationship 1-85). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
theory in consumer research. Journal of Consumer Research, 24, Sivadas, E., & Venkatesh, R. (1995). An examination of individual and ob-
343-373. ject-specific influences on the extended .self and its relation to attachment
Friestad, M., & Wright, P. (1994). The persuasion knowledge model: How and satisfaction. Advances in Consumer Research, 22, 406-41 2.
people cope with persuasion attempts. Journal of ConsumerResearch, 21, Stein, N. L., & Albro, E. R. (1997). Building complexity and coherence:
1-3 1. Children's use of goal-structured knowledge in telling stories. In M.

BUILDING CONSUMER CONNECTIONS TO BRANDS 179
Bamberg (Ed.), Narrative development: Sixapproaches (vol. 1, pp. 5-44). Based on a series of factor and LISREL analyses, we re-
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. duced the 27 items used in the undergraduate study to seven
Stem, B. B. (1994). Classical and vignette television advertising dramas:
SBC items (see Table 3). Cronbach's alpha statistics were
Structural models, formal analysis, and consumer effects. Journal of Con-
calculated for the seven-item scale, across the entire set of
sumer Research, 20, 60 1-6 15.
Stem, B. B. (1995). Consumer myths, Frye's taxonomy, and the structural observations (a = .95) and various subsets (three levels of
analysis of consumption text. Journal of Consumer Research, 22, SBCs from the sorting task, alpha ranged from .92 to .93, and
165-185. each brand individually, .80 < a < .98).P rincipal components
Sujan, M., Bettman, J., & Baumgartner, H. (1993). Influencing judgments
analysis was also performed on the seven scale items to be
using autobiographical memories: A self-referencing perspective. Jour-
certain they all loaded on one dimension. The single-factor
nal of Marketing Research, 30, 422436.
Thompson, C. J, Locander, W. B., & Pollio, H. R. (1990). The lived meaning solution (the first eigenvalue = 5.33, the rest < 1 .O) explains
of free choice: An existential-phenomenological description of everyday 76% of the variance in the seven SBC scale items.
consumer experiences of contemporary married women. Journal of Con- LISREL analysis also provides evidence of validity. A
sumer Research, 17, 346-361.
LISREL model with the seven scale items measuring one un-
Wallendorf, M., & Arnould, E. J. (1988). "My favorite things": A cross-cul-
derlying construct fits the data reasonably well, ~*(14=)
tural inquiry into object attachment, possessiveness, and social linkage.
Journal of Consumer Research, 14, 53 1-547. 341.48,p < .001, not unusual given this test statistic's sensi-
Wells, W. D. (1 988) Lectures and dramas. In P. Cafferata & A. Tybout (Eds.), tivity to sample size; CFI = 38, IF1 = 38,G FI = 30, and stan-
Cognitive and affective responses to advertising (pp. 13-20). Lexington, dardized RMR = 0.05. The factor loadings for each item are
MA: Lexington.
significant (r > .95, t > 11.81). Finally, the results of
discriminant analysis show that the seven-item scale is able
to significantly predict into which evaluation category each
APPENDIX brand fell for each participant, h = .60, F(l,390)= 16.23,~<
SELF-BRAND CONNECTION SCALE .001, with 65% of the 395 sorted brands correctly classified,
DEVELOPMENT compared to 44% if assigned using the largest group crite-
rion.
This appendix summarizes the process undertaken to de- The undergraduate sorting task study was followed by a
velop a scale to measure SBCs. First, based on a review of re- second sorting task study using 20 MBA student participants,
lated theory, the self-brand concept was defined, as summa- 12 brands, and the seven-item SBC scale obtained in the un-
rized in the text. Next, we developed a list of 27 potential dergraduate study. The scale development process analyses
scale items designed to measure the degree to which consum- were replicated on the MBA sample; specifically,
ers have formed a SBC with a particular brand. These items Cronbach's alpha statistics were calculated, across the entire
were adopted from Abelson and Prentice's (1989) study of set of observations (a= .95) and various subsets (three levels
the dimensions of meaningful possessions, brand equity re- of SBCs from the sorting task, .89 < a < .92, and each brand
search (primarily to measure the notion of brand esteem, individually, .87 < a < .96).P rincipal components analysis
which is positive sentiment toward a brand; Owen, 1993), resulted in a single-factor solution (the first eigenvalue =
plus some additional items created to address the role of the 5.32, the rest < 1.0) that explains 76% of the variance in the
self more specifically. Once this set of items was assembled, seven SBC scale items. The LISREL model also fits the data
a sorting task study with 20 undergraduate participants was well, ~2(14=) 7 6.16,p < .OO 1, due to sample size; CFI = .96,
conducted to empirically reduce the set of potential scale IF1 = .96, GFI = .91, and standardized RMR = 0.03. The fac-
items to a more manageable number that reliably and validly tor loadings for each item were significant (r > .95, t >
captured the SBC construct. 10.36).I n the MBA study, the results of discriminant analysis
In the sorting task study, participants sorted a wide range show that the seven-item scale was able to significantly pre-
of brands selected to assure that the student participants had dict into which evaluation category each brand fell for each
strong SBCs to some brands and weak SBCs to others (n participant, h=. 60, F(2,235)= 18.09,<~ .001, with 65% of
brands = 20). Participants were asked to sort the various the 240 sorted brands correctly classified, compared to 36%
brands, listed individually on 3 x 5 cards, into three piles: if assigned using the largest group criterion.
The first pile was for meaningful brands that are "me," that is,
represent who the subject is, communicate something impor-
Validity of the Self-Brand Connections Scale
tant about him or her, or have a special, personal meaning, or
both. The second pile was for meaningless brands, which To provide some indication of convergent validity, we identi-
were defined as brands that lack strong associations for each fied one scale that measures a similar concept to SBCs.
participant. Finally, the third pile was for meaningful brands Sivadas and Machleit (1994;i n Sivadas & Venkatesh, 1995)
that have strong associations, but represent the antithesis of developed this scale to quantify Belk's (1988)e xtended-self
who the participant perceives him- or herself to be. Partici- notion in the realm of possessions. Because the SBC concept
pants then completed a questionnaire that included the 27 po- was based in part on Belk's extended-self concept, these two
tential scale items for all 20 brands. scales should be highly correlated. We were able to adapt the

extended-self scale to measure brands rather than posses- car in front of a mountain and lake, with a couple dressed in
sions with only minor modifications. The Sivadas and camping clothes off to one side. In the MS condition, the ad
Machleit scale was included in the questionnaire for the text read, "Think about the next time you'll need an all-terrain
MBA sorting task study. The extended-self scale was highly vehicle to get where you want to be. . .. " In the AM condition,
correlated with the seven-item SBC scale (r = .80,p < .001). the ad text read, "Remember the last time you needed an
Thus, the Sivadas and Machleit extended-self scale is similar all-terrain vehicle to get where you wanted to be. . . . " SBCs
to our SBC scale. To test whether the SBC model is signifi- were measured using our seven-item, 7-point scale (a = .94),
cantly better able to distinguish between the three brand-sort- whereas ABw as measured with three 7-point scale items, an-
ing categories than the extended-self scale, a J test was con- chored by very unfavorable/very favorable, very badvery
ducted to compare R2s across two, non-nested models good, and very negativehery positive (a= .95).
(Davidson & MacKinnon, 1981). In the two-stage regression Analysis of the seven SBC items and three AB items
analysis conducted for this test, h is equal to 0, F(1, 236) = shows that these two concepts are empirically distinct from
79.16, p < .001, indicating that the SBC scale is better at pre- one another. An unconstrained LISREL model with seven
dicting which pile brands will be sorted into than the Sivadas SBC items, three AB items, and everything free to vary ex-
and Machleit extended-self scale. cept the two-factor structure, results in a significant
To provide discriminant validity for the SBC scale (com- chi-square statistic, x2(34) = 70.70,~< .001, due to sensitiv-
pared to brand attitudes), as well as test for nomological va- ity to sample size. The other fit indexes suggest that the
lidity, a self-referencing study was conducted. Self-referenc- two-factor model fits the data reasonably well (CFI = .90, IF1
ing has been shown to enhance brand attitudes consistently = .90, GFI = .75, and standardized RMR = 0.06). The stan-
across different formats when ad arguments are strong-for dardized factor loadings exceed 0.67 for SBC and 0.92 for
example, second-person verbiage (Burnkrant & Unnava, AB (all t > 4.55). To provide evidence of discriminant validity
1995; Meyers-Levy & Perrachio, 1996), mental stimulation between the two constructs, we ran a LISREL model con-
(Escalas & Krishnamurthy, 1995), and autobiographical straining the 10 scale items to load on a single factor. The
memory (AM) recall (Sujan et al., 1993). However, we pro- model constraining the 10 items to be one factor is signifi-
pose that there will be qualitative differences in the extent to cantly worse than the unconstrained model (x2 difference =
which two of these different formats affect SBCs. Autobio- 81 37, p < .001).
graphical memories are much richer and more closely tied to Both the MS condition and the AM condition evoke
the self than MSs. Memories are based on real experiences equivalent amounts of self-referencing, MS = 3.85, AM =
and as such should be more detailed than imaginations about 3.63, F(l,35) < 1. O, p > .60.4 The assertion that AM retrieval
the future (Krishnamurthy & Sujan, 1999). In autobiographi- will enhance SBCs to a greater extent than MS is supported:
cal memories, the self is the protagonist in detailed recollec- SBCs are significantly higher in the AM condition compared
tions, even if the memories are not necessarily veridical. to the MS condition in a two-way analysis of variance
Therefore, autobiographical memories should have a greater (ANOVA) model, MS = 2.04, AM = 2.53, F(1,33) = 4.06, p
effect on SBCs than MS (PI). On the other hand, self-refer- < .05; P1. Furthermore, the results show that, as expected,
encing should increase elaboration about the ad, regardless there are no significant differences in the brand attitude
of whether the self-referencing is induced via MS or AM re- means Across the two conditions, MS = 3.33, AM = 3.45, F(1,
trieval. Therefore, there should be no differential effect of the 33) < 1.0, p > .40; P2. This simple study provides some pre-
type of self-referencing cue on attitudes toward the adver- liminary evidence of validity for the SBC scale used in this
tised brand (P2). article. The experiment described in the text provides addi-
These propositions were tested in an experiment where 40 tional nomological and discriminant validity for the SBC
undergraduate marketing students viewed one of two scale (again compared to brand attitudes).
full-color print ads for a Geo Tracker, showing a photo of the
4T~coov ariates are included in these analyses: attitude toward Ameri-
can cars and an "outdoors" type of person measure.